Users in the U.S. can get this software from the following mirrors:

	ftp.uu.net:pub/database/lincks/
	gatekeeper.dec.com:/pub/net/infosys/lincks/
	sunsite.unc.edu:pub/packages/database/lincks/

This directory contains the source code and bootstrap database for 
the LINCKS (Linkopings INtelligent Communication of Knowledge System)
database system.  

If you don't have gnuzip, see the file COMPRESSION in the top directory.

We can be reached by e-mail at lincks@ida.liu.se.  Bug reports can be
sent to lincks-bugs@ida.liu.se.

The files in this directory are:

README			This file.
ANNOUNCMENT		Copy of the announcement sent out on UseNet.
HISTORY			List of bug fixes and improvements done
			to the system. Also included in tar files.
LINCKS.FAQ		Frequently Asked Questions about the LINCKS
			system.  Also included in the tar files.

lincks-2.tar.gz		A (symbolic link) to the last version

lincks-2.2.1.tar.gz	LINCKS Release 2.2 patchlevel 1, the
			source for the database system, the
			documentation, and the bootstrap database.
			This is a gzip compressed tar file.  If
			you don't have gzip, I recommend you get it, as
			it's better than `compress' (IMHO).  It's
			available at prep.ai.mit.edu in pub/gnu and at
			other GNU ftp sites (released 940609). 

lincks-2.2.tar.gz	LINCKS Release 2.2 (released 940602)
lincks-2.1.tar.gz	LINCKS Release 2.1 

lincks-2.2.1.patch.README Information about lincks-2.2.1.patch.gz 
lincks-2.2.1.patch.gz	Patch for LINCKS Release 2.2 (lincks-2.2.tar.gz)

lincks-2.x-X11R6.patch	Patch for compiling LINCKS under X11R6

xlincks_manual.ps.gz	the xlincks User's Manual for the interface to
			the LINCKS system, also include in the tar files.
			Compressed with gzip.

lincks_admin.ps.gz	the LINCKS System Adminstration Manual, also
			included in the tar files. Compressed with gzip.

liblincks_man.ps.gz     the LINCKS low level library API programming 
			reference manue. Compressed with gzip.

lincks-html-doc.tar.gz  the xlincks Users's Manual, the System Adminstration
 			manual and the liblincks manual in HTLM format.
			Compressed with gzip.

articles/		directory with LINCKS related articles and	
			technical reports.

alpha/			directory with patches to LINCKS, alpha quality.

User contributions and patches will be added to this directory as time
goes by.

xnotify.shar.gz:	the current release of xnotify, a little toy to
			pop up messages on one or multiple X displays
			and get some sort of response to that message.
			Written by David Partain.  This is compressed
			using gzip, which is GNU's compression
			utility.  I suggest you get it if you don't
			have it.

