Macintosh Tcl & Tk

by Ray Johnson
Sun Microsystems Laboratories
rjohnson@eng.sun.com

This directory contains a collection of files related to Tcl and
Tk for the Macintosh, all of which are available for anonymous FTP.  
Below is a description of what is in the various files in this 
directory:

mactk8.0p1.sea.hqx

	This distribution is a "binary" only release.  It contains an
	installer program that will install a 68k or PowerPC version
	of the "Wish" application.  In addition, in installs the Tcl &
	Tk libraries in the Extensions folder inside your System
	Folder.  (These are just text files - no inits are installed.)

mactcltk-full-8.0p1.sea.hqx

	This release contains the full release of Tcl and Tk for the
	Macintosh plus the More Files packages which both Macintosh
	Tcl and Tk rely on.  Warning! - This is a very large file (on
	the order of 12 megs).

mactcl-source-8.0p1.sea.mqx

	This release contains the complete source for Tcl 8.0.  In
	addition, Metrowerks CodeWarrior libraries and project files
	are included.  However, you must already have the More Files
	package to compile this code.

mactk-source-8.0p1.sea.hqx

	This release contains the complete source to Tk for the Macintosh
	In addition, Metrowerks CodeWarrior libraries and project files
	are included.  However, you must already have the Tcl 8.0, More
	Files package to compile this code.


TclProcess.sit.hqx - This is a sample application that uses the
	Tcl/Tk libraries.  The application lists information about
	the process running on your Macintosh.  (It's modeled off
	of the Process Watcher application.)  Sources are included.
	It's not really supported - but I'd love to hear your
	feedback.  (You need the source release for Tcl7.6 &
	Tk4.2 inorder to use this sample code.)

MoreFiles1.4.3.sea.hqx - This is the source for the MoreFiles library
			used by the Macintosh Tcl/Tk sources.  It contains
			File releated functions that may one day be
			in the Mac OS.


*** old-versions - 	This is a directory that contains older
			releases of MacTcl.  The release number
			should be included in the file name.  These
			versions are not supported.

For more information there is a collection of Web pages on 
Tcl and Tk at the URL: http://sunscript.sun.com/

Questions or problems with any of these distributions should be directed
to the comp.lang.tcl newsgroup or the mactcl mailing list.
